[GENTLE MUSIC PLAYING]
GESAR MUKPO: In 1900, a
child was born in Tibet.
He would become a
great Buddhist master.
His name was Shechen
Kongtrul Rinpoche.
In 1960, he died
while imprisoned
by the Chinese government.
In 1973, he would be
reborn in America as me.
[RAP MUSIC PLAYING]
MAN: How many
tracks will it play?
GESAR MUKPO: I don't know.
It seems fine with six.
So say I'll take just this one.
And I know that's like one
of the ones I want to use.
And then lay that one
down so that I can put
the other ones on top of that.
So we've got this
one for this section.
This one's my main one
for the next section.
This one is my main one
Or you can take
them if you want.
Or I can take them.
If you're thinking I don't
look like an enlightened
Buddhist master, you're right.
I couldn't think of a worse
way to describe myself.
Yeah, exactly, that's
what Tibetans--
I think I told you that
Shechen, they do this hot water
with milk and honey.
Papa.
Papa?
Papa!
I drink tea.
Yeah, you do.
You should drink it.
Then you can go to Tibet
and have tea there.
Other than the fact that
I make music videos,
my life is pretty ordinary.
I struggle with the
responsibilities
of being a parent.
I'm separated from my wife.
And I live from
paycheck to paycheck.
I'm going to see
you tomorrow, honey.
Let's give me a hug.
Give me a hug, sweetie.
Can you say bye?
I'll see you tomorrow.
You're coming down to my house
tomorrow to feed the fish.
[GENTLE MUSIC PLAYING]
GESAR MUKPO: I'm looking
at some of the belongings
of Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche.
They were recently delivered
to me by a friend returning
from a monastery in Nepal.
These exquisite paintings were
used in Buddhist initiations
in Tibet for hundreds of years.
Now, they sit in a box
in my bedroom closet.
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
In the 16th century,
one in four Tibetans
was Buddhist monk or nun.
It was during this golden
age of Tibetan Buddhism
that a tradition originated
whereupon the passing away
of an enlightened
Buddhist teacher,
a young child
would be recognized
as the reincarnation.
This child would
assume leadership
of their predecessor's
monastery,
as well as the
surrounding villages.
They called these
children tulkus.
Some became great
leaders, others, teachers,
scholars, poets, and yogis.
For hundreds of years, this
tradition remained unchanged.
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
In the 1970s, something
interesting started happening.
Tulkus were being
discovered in the West.
I know because I was
one of them, recognized
by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche,
a revered Buddhist master,
during his visit to
California in 1976.
He informed my
family he believed
I was a tulku, the reincarnation
of one of his peers
who had died in Tibet,
and that I should
be enthroned immediately.
So at three years old, I
was enthrones as a tulku
in Berkeley, California.
[BELL RINGING]
That's where my story begins.
[TIBETAN CHANTING]
My name is Gesar Mukpo.
And I live in
Halifax, Nova Scotia.
I've been a constant
traveler, growing up
in the United States,
Canada, England,
Germany, and even India.
But before I tell you
any more about myself,
I'd like to take a
look at another tulku
who grew up in
Halifax, a close friend
of mine, Dylan Henderson.
Dylan was the first
Caucasian tulku
to be discovered in the West.
He was recognized in
1975 by the great teacher
and scholar, Chogyam
Trungpa Rinpoche, my father.
Dylan certainly
has a unique story,
that of a blond haired,
blue-eyed Western child
chosen by Tibetan monks as the
reincarnation of their teacher.
There's paparazzi
over there, OK?
They're following you.
-Grammy?
Grammy?
Oh, yes, yes.
There's a little
picture over here.
Is that me or is that
Jen, the Yoda picture?
DYLAN'S MOTHER: That's you.
No, you looked like
you were 80 years old.
You just--
DYLAN HENDERSON: I
had the old man look?
DYLAN'S MOTHER: Yeah.
DYLAN HENDERSON: There's my
father looking like a hippy.
DYLAN'S MOTHER: Excuse me.
There's your father
looking like you.
See that green van?
We lived in that green
van till Dylan was born.
We met at a Jimi
Hendrix concert.
I was involved with
the anti-war movement.
I went south and I worked with
Martin Luther King's group
outside of Atlanta, Georgia.
And his father was an activist.
Yeah, I didn't even do that.
Worked my teeth, so--
DYLAN HENDERSON:
My mother became
interested in Tibetan Buddhism.
Summer of '75, went out
to Boulder, Colorado
to Naropa Institute to do a
program with Trungpa Rinpoche.
Walked up after a talk.
Sort of presented myself,
and the next morning-- or
that night, Rinpoche came back.
He said, you want to talk to me?
Be at my office in the morning.
And we went and met him.
I pushed ahead of her and ran
into the room to meet Rinpoche.
And I felt at that time
there was a real connection.
It was like a loved
one or-- this may
sound strange, but a parent.
It had that sense.
And I felt I didn't
know exactly why
I was connected to this
person or anything like that.
But I felt this connection.
He had told my mother
and people around.
But he didn't make
this general knowledge
that I was one of his teachers.
But he didn't say who.
And he left it that.
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
At that point, he wanted me
to go to meet His Holiness
Karmapa, who was going to
be giving a black crown
ceremony in Boulder.
And I met His Holiness Karmapa.
And I also had a very
strong connection with him.
And then he confirmed the
recognition of me as a tulku.
And at that point,
he wanted me to come
to Rumtek, where I would be
enthroned and put in robes.
And that would be the
last you ever hear of me.
But Trungpa Rinpoche said no.
He said he was born in
the West for a reason.
And he would undersee
my education.
And I would not be
taken to Rumtek.
Whatever I do, I need
to study and practice.
It's helped me to understand
a lot of the problems
that I had being a
tulku in the West
and not having a
form and a structure
that tulkus maybe
had in the East.
I have a degree in
anthropology and history,
both very fascinating subjects.
Diving is wonderful.
For me, it's taken on a
quality of being a meditation
in action practice
because it really
helps me work with my mind.
I have to really be present and
very aware of my surroundings.
GESAR MUKPO: My father
had made the same decision
about my education.
So Dylan and I have had to
ponder the same question.
If we weren't going
to be brought up
in the traditional
way in a monastery,
what does it even
mean to be a tulku?
WOMAN: Are there any charlatans
teaching at Naropa this summer?
[LAUGHTER]
Well, we have to have someone.
Otherwise, things too clean.
[LAUGHTER]
And often, some
of the charlatans
also inspire the students in
the name of being teachers.
So there's room for that.
We had to grow up.
And it had to become American
Buddhists who inspired
and who has the
understanding together.
It can only work with
the Western world
is that it is necessary to
have that kind of situation.
There is a point at
the level that how far
we can live on import.
And there's some
point that we've
got to manufacture ourselves
rather than borrowing
from someone else.
Otherwise, you owe
an enormous debt.
GESAR MUKPO: My
father died in 1987
and took with him the answers
to so many of my questions.
So I head to Florida to see my
mother, hear her recollections,
and get her advice.
DIANA MUKPO: I had a dream
also before you were conceived,
which was quite interesting.
I was at Karma Choling
with your father.
And in my dream, I went
into the room next door.
And there was a being there,
standing in the corner.
It was a male being.
And said to me in the dream,
said, please, will you
give me a place in your body.
And I was pregnant
within a couple weeks.
And we had been trying
for a few months.
So....
Just think, this was
your eighth birthday
party because we had a costume
party and you were a samurai.
It was a major--
everybody dressed up.
Yeah, I remember that outfit.
I loved that outfit.
DIANA MUKPO: It was so great.
[HORSE WHINNIES]
GESAR MUKPO: My mother
was born in London in 1953
to an upper class British
family, her father a barrister
and her mother an opera singer.
My father was born in a
tent on the plains of Tibet.
When he was 18 months
old, a group of monks
would show up at the
tent door to declare
him the reincarnation
of their teacher.
He would be raised
in a monastery
until he was 19, when he
fled Tibet on the heels
of the Chinese invasion.
A brilliant mind, four years
after arriving in India,
he would end up in England
attending Oxford University
on a Spalding scholarship.
It was there that he
and my mother met.
DIANA MUKPO: I heard
that he was going
to be giving a talk
at a rally for Tibetan
liberation in London.
And that was the first
time I set eyes on him.
And I felt an immediate and
instant connection with him
as soon as he walked
onto the stage.
So after that, I
resolved to meet him.
But I didn't expect to
have the kind of reaction
that I had when I
just set eyes on him.
I felt like I'd known him
for lifetimes the first time
I saw him.
It was immediate, instantaneous,
incredible connection.
And the rest is history.
There were a lot of hippy
types, but generally, really
sort of the intelligentsia.
Very, very smart people
were attracted to him.
And he was brilliant and wasn't
threatened by that at all.
So people who were
very, very smart,
most of them college educated,
who actually were really
seeking something
that would make more
sense to them than what
they had been raised with.
We spent some time together.
And he said to me, sometime,
I'd love to marry you.
And I said to him, well,
I'd like to marry you, too.
And then we discovered
that January 1, 1970,
there had been a law
passed in Scotland
that you could get married at 16
without your parents' consent.
So on January the 3rd, 1970, I
eloped with him to Edinburgh,
where we got married,
which was less than three
months after my 16th birthday.
My mother found out from
the newspaper reporters that
knocked on her door in
London and said to her,
we'd like to find out
about your daughter
who married the Tibetan monk.
And she said, oh, my God.
Oh, my God.
Tessa got married.
And Tessa was my older sister
who at that time was 19.
And they said, no,
no, it was Diana.
And she fainted.
All the kids were really
excited that Diana had done
a very cool thing. [LAUGHS]
I mean, he loved you very much.
He believed in you 100%.
He was really concerned
about your education
and felt very strongly that you
could grow up and become a very
powerful Buddhist teacher
and wanted to create the best
environment for you to grow
up and be educated to be
able to go in that direction.
GESAR MUKPO: If
my father believed
I could become a Buddhist
teacher yet didn't send me off
to a Buddhist monastery,
then what exactly did he
have in mind?
[WIND BLOWING]
[BRASS BAND PLAYING]
Being a tulku born in the West
is an interesting predicament.
There is no
predetermined course.
So it's impossible to tell
whether you're on track or not.
With that in mind, I
head to New York City
to meet another
Western tulku, Ashoka,
and find out how he has dealt
with his unusual circumstance.
[BRASS BAND PLAYING]
Ashoka and I have something
else in common, our mother.
Ashoka is my younger brother.
[CHATTING]
In Tibet, it was not unusual
for more than one tulku
to be born into the same family.
This is actually a painting
of the previous incarnation
of Khamyon Rinpoche.
So you know, I
obviously say a lot
that I have a very hard
time with being a tulku,
yet I still display this thangka
of my previous incarnations.
So I don't know what that says.
But--
GESAR MUKPO: Why do you
think they gave it to you?
I think that they
gave it to me,
I'm sure, because they believe
that I am the incarnation
of their previous teacher.
And that's what's so
hard about it, you know?
It wouldn't matter if I believed
that I was the incarnation
of Khamyon Rinpoche
if I was teaching
and if I'd gone through
all that training.
I wouldn't have to
worry so much about that
because I'd actually
be fulfilling that role
that they need.
When I was in Tibet,
I mean, it was
a really intense experience.
I was enthroned, which is
essentially their way of kind
of sanctifying the recognition
of the next incarnation
of a Rinpoche.
So another lama will
perform a ceremony
where they sort of impart the
blessings and the artifacts
of the previous incarnation.
And that's sort of the
official stamp of approval
that you now hold that role
and you hold that seat.
At one point, a man
who was the younger
brother of the previous
Khamyon Rinpoche came up to me.
And he was a very old man.
And he was just tears
streaming down his face.
And you kind of
feel a little bit
like a deer in the headlights.
What do you offer to somebody?
So I try to just be
there as much as I can.
I don't know.
I don't know what the fuck.
Oh, God.
And good morning.
Have a great day, ma'am.
Morning!
AUTOMATED VOICE:
Please stand away
from the bright yellow strip.
[MAN SINGING]
ASHOKA MUKPO: I don't
think that my role
is to be a teacher, to
be wearing the robes
and be up on a throne.
And if that makes
me a failed tulku,
then maybe that's just my karma.
But I still think I can
be of some kind of benefit
to somebody.
And that's, I think, what
being a Buddhist is about.
I work at Human
Rights Watch, which
is a nonprofit
organization that monitors
human rights conditions
in different countries
around the world.
I work for the program
that does prison conditions
inside of the United States.
So we really look at the
situation for people who
are incarcerated
in America and we
try to investigate
situations where
we feel like the standard
of care for those prisoners
isn't being met.
And we try to get certain
policies changed that we think
are not beneficial
for the rehabilitation
of prisoners who are in jail.
Hi, is this Kevin?
Hi, Kevin.
How are you doing?
This is Ashoka from
Human Rights Watch.
I'm just following
up on a phone call
that you gave to
us the other day.
I think if the police aren't
handling this appropriately,
it might be worthwhile for
you to think about getting
some legal representation.
Right.
I mean, I think there's
a lot of people like you
who were not arrested
for violent crimes
and who weren't arrested
for the types of crimes
that typically people think are
the crimes that people who are
on the registry have committed.
But then, they're subject to
the same kind of harassment
and lack of employment and
those kinds of problems
that it sounds like
you're running across.
OK.
I've always really felt
like helping people
from the perspective
of being an educated
Westerner who came from, like,
a pretty well-off family.
It's important to
give something back.
I think I've at this
point pretty much decided
that, whatever I
do with my life,
I want to have it be
about at least trying
to make the world a little
bit of a better place
because there's a lot
of problems out there.
[BRASS BAND PLAYS]
GESAR MUKPO: What
about the tulkus
who have actually lived up to
the tremendous expectations
placed on them?
In my eyes, the living
embodiment of this
is my teacher, Dzongsar Khyentse
Rinpoche, a renowned Buddhist
master and filmmaker.
So in hopes of tracking
him down, I get on a plane
and travel to northern India.
[EXOTIC MUSIC PLAYING]
India is the
birthplace of Buddhism.
2,500 years ago, Siddharta
Gautama came into this world
and eventually became one of
the most influential figures
in history.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1959, during the
Chinese invasion,
many Tibetans fled
to India, where
the Indian government
helped them establish
Tibetan refugee settlements.
One of these settlements,
perched in the Himalayan
foothills, was Bir.
This was my father's
first stop when he escaped
to India almost 50 years ago.
Today, Bir has grown into a
thriving Tibetan community.
[DOG BARKS]
Without looking back, we
can never move forward.
But without moving forward, we
are simply stuck in the past.
[MONKS CHANTING]
When I was a child, the
idea of being a tulku
seemed completely normal.
By the time I hit my teens, I
started to find the whole thing
crazy and wondered if someone
was playing some kind of joke
on me.
[CHANTING]
It wasn't unusual to have
one of my father's students
ask me for advice when I
was only 11 or 12 years old.
[CHANTING]
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
I've always felt I have
some kind of obligation
that people expected from me.
But I could never figure
out exactly what it was.
And how could I fill
these obligations
if I'm just an ordinary person?
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
I first met Dzongsar
Khyentse Rinpoche,
my teacher, when I
was 16 years old,
and was immediately
drawn to him.
A few years later, instead
of going to college,
I went to India
to study with him.
[RAGTIME MUSIC]
[CHATTING, LAUGHING]
I've always valued his
guidance and insight.
And I'm hoping to spend
some time with him.
Apparently, I'm
not the only one.
[RAGTIME MUSIC CONTINUES]
[CHATTING]
DZONGSAR KHYENTSE RINPOCHE:
Really, seriously.
GESAR MUKPO: Raised as a
tulku in the traditional way,
he underwent an
extensive education.
He's also a filmmaker whose
debut film was well received
at the Cannes Film Festival.
I'm very traditional.
You know?
There's so many new
tulkus you must have met.
Oh, God.
And actually, many of them,
they behave, you know.
And even they behave,
thousand of them
and this man who
misbehave, I prefer him.
That's another thing
I can tell you.
We're still waiting.
We are still waiting for him
to do what he's supposed to do.
That's what I have to say.
What do you think?
Hmm?
Tibetan lamas, especially high
lamas like Karmapa in your case
or Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche, beginning
to find tulkus in the West is
very encouraging because this
actually shows there
is no nepotism,
like that tulkus will
always-- that Westerners,
you're all doom.
You'll never be a
Buddhist incarnation.
You understand what I'm saying.
And this is a great thing.
I think there should be more.
OK, if it was done properly.
Because from two points.
From the reincarnation's
point of view,
reincarnation does not--
like the Tibetans don't
end up becoming only Tibetan.
The transmigration
happens everywhere.
In fact, some of the high
lamas, for the benefit
of sentient beings,
they must reincarnate
as a bird or a lizard.
But we human beings don't
want to really think
in terms of enthroning a
lizard as the seat holder
of your big monastery, do you?
Similarly, manifestation also.
Wherever it benefits.
Wherever the reincarnation
benefits, even as a lizard.
[BIRDS CALLING]
[MUSIC PLAYING, DON BROWNRIGG,
"IN IT"]
GESAR MUKPO: I found
out that there's
this young tulku named
Wyatt, who's 23 or somewhere
in that range.
And my teacher, Dzongsar
Khyentse Rinpoche, I guess,
told him to study Tibetan
or something like that.
So yeah, I want to give a call.
I have his cell phone number.
And give him a call and see
if we could get together.
And I'm not sure if I'm going
to get in touch with him.
But why not give it a shot?
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[PHONE RINGING]
Maybe he's class, though.
Hopefully, he's in class.
["IN IT" CONTINUES]
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
--[TEACHER SPEAKING TIBETAN]
Good.
[HORN HONKS]
GESAR MUKPO: Oh, hey, Wyatt!
By the way, Gesar.
Nice to meet you.
Where are you from?
San Francisco.
I live in Canada now.
So thanks for coming, man.
Let me buy you dinner?
OK, yeah.
WYATT ARNOLD: Like,
I was supposed
to go to India when I was five.
My father wanted to
raise me in the West.
And my mother didn't want to let
me go halfway around the world.
I ended up not going to
India until just a year ago.
I was recognized and enthroned
when I was five years
old by Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche.
I wasn't scared.
I wasn't nervous.
And it was very relaxed.
But it was very intense.
I think when you're a kid,
it's easier for people
to accept because
you're so innocent.
You're so fresh.
And you're not worried
about their expectations.
So it was easy for
them to believe
because it's just a boy.
In Catholic prep school, I was
known as the Little Dalai Lama.
When I was a kid,
I would say things.
You know, I remember you and me
hanging out in this courtyard
in such-and-such a gompa,
in such-and-such a time
and such-and-such
a place in Tibet.
For Chagdud Tulku,
being around him
was like being
with a grandfather.
I mean, he sort of
was always looking
after me, disciplining me.
He taught me
Tibetan for a while.
He taught me how to read
Tibetan when I was little.
He had me on the throne
always next to him.
And I'd have to read
my text during puja.
All sorts of practices.
Yeah, and of course,
being around him
was so-- I loved
being around him.
I mean, how could I not?
He was just so kind.
He would give everything to me.
He'd just always look at me
with those eyes of-- just
like-- how do you say?
You know, those
eyes that you want
everybody to look at you with,
those eyes of just such care,
you know.
I don't know so many
good words for it.
That whole phase was
until I was eight.
After that, being around
him, we didn't talk so much.
And I went to him one day,
I think maybe in 2000,
right before I was
entering high school.
And I was like,
what should I do.
And Rinpoche was like,
listen to your father.
So after that, he sort of--
I mean, eased off a lot.
And I changed after that.
I don't know how to explain it.
But some days I felt like, oh,
maybe he doesn't care anymore.
But then there was-- I still
saw those eyes, of course.
And I had taken an
interest in lama dancing.
I was so into it.
Like, I was just
into this thing.
I mean, you put on this huge
costume that weighs maybe 30
pounds, and this mask
that digs into your head,
like you got to put
all these pads in it.
And it's like, these huge teeth.
And you wear a
costume like that.
And you just spin around
and jump up in the air.
And it's really exciting.
And I enjoyed it so much
that when I sat back down
and looked up to him, and
he was like-- I had never
seen him so content with me.
I was always worried
about his approval.
And after that, it just--
Maybe it was the whole-- I think
it was just the whole ceremony.
And he looked so just
really happy, happy
about everything that had gone.
That was about the last
image I have of him.
[CYMBALS CRASH]
He died soon after that.
[DRUMS AND CYMBALS PLAYING]
GESAR MUKPO: Without a
doubt, the most remarkable
part of being a tulku
is the connections
developed with teachers.
In a way, my father was both
my parent and my teacher.
So losing him was devastating.
It's when I'm in
places like this,
surrounded by our
sacred culture,
that I feel closest to him.
There are only two known
photographs of Shechen Kongtrul
Rinpoche, one taken in
a Chinese photo studio,
and the second, from
his later years,
taken by my teenaged father
with an old box camera
that he had borrowed.
He developed and printed
the picture at night
in the main shrine room.
I can only imagine how
proud my father must've
been when he developed
his first picture
and saw the face of
his teacher appear.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS
PLAYING]
The entire tulku tradition
began with the second Karmapa,
more than 700 years ago.
I'm sitting on the steps
of Gyuto Monastery.
We're about to interview
His Holiness, Ogyen Trinley
Dorje, the 17th Karmapa.
The 16th Karmapa
recognized me when
I was six years old as well.
So this is the first time I'm
meeting his reincarnation.
The current Karmapa is the 17th
in an unbroken line of tulkus.
At 14 years old, he made a
daring escape from Tibet.
Did you have any
problems believing
that you were a tulku?
-Myself?
GESAR MUKPO: Yeah, yourself.
[SPEAKING TIBETAN WITH
ASSISTANT]
[CHANTING AND RINGING BELLS]
GESAR MUKPO: The
Karmapa is an incredibly
important and beloved figure
in the Tibetan community.
He is considered a
possible successor
to the current Dalai Lama.
Some people have even
said that the Dalai Lama
is grooming him for this job.
[RINGING BELLS, CHANTING]
Tibetan monasteries, you know,
they're a very big institution.
They own a lot of properties.
It's a very big thing in the
social structure in Tibet.
And wherever there is money,
wherever there's power,
there's corruption.
And there's also fear.
There's also you have
to have management.
You know?
So it could be for the purpose
of managing a big institution.
This happens to be an answer
in a society like Tibet.
I mean, in the West, you elect
the big guy in the White House.
But it does not really
happen like this is in Tibet.
So the way to continue
the big guy in White House
happens to be like this.
And it has its charm,
if it is done properly.
I mean, like the
present Dalai Lama,
he holds one of
the highest throne.
I mean, the highest
throne in Tibet.
And he happens to be a child of
a farmer, really a poor farmer.
[GENTLE GUITAR MUSIC]
GESAR MUKPO: All of
the tulkus that I've
met have a similar feeling
of almost being lost
or alone and no one
they can talk to.
And not really in a bad way.
Ashoka, he said
to me a one point,
I don't really think
about this stuff very much
or talk about it.
When you grow up as
a tulku in the West,
you could sort of completely
flip and not believe it at all
or completely believe it.
And it can flip back and
forth with one thought.
And I really see Wyatt
going through that.
And it's interesting for me to
realize-- because I'm 34 now
and Wyatt is 20-- that
he's actually looking
to me for advice or to ask
me what I've gone through
and how I've dealt with it,
and realize that actually I
have some kind of
valuable experience
that I can reassure him with.
I mean, I've always struggled
with this kind of stuff.
The whole idea of being a
tulku is so sort of far-fetched
and so out there that if
you tell it to most people,
they just think it's some
complete mumbo-jumbo bullshit.
And--
I think the idea of
tulku is all right.
It's just when you
give someone a title.
And what-- you said
something earlier like,
you tell someone they're
supposed to be this person.
Like, does that
mean you're supposed
to act like that person?
Does that mean you're
supposed to carry on whatever
that person was doing?
Is that person
different than you?
How much--
It's just so strange, man.
[BUS ENGINE ROARING]
I mean, if you believe
in reincarnation,
then everybody's
a tulku, you know.
But the tulkus that are
recognized are supposed to be,
what is it, and
eighth-level bodhisattva,
who has power over karma, power
over rebirth, power over like,
time, like they
can completely defy
all the laws of physical
science because they're mind
is so great, so precise.
Yeah, I guess that is really
been my experience is that I
try to not think about
it in those terms
because that's just
to unbelievable.
I try to understand it
on a more personal level.
To try?
I guess I feel like when I
read about that kind of stuff,
it makes more sense
to me because it's
not just some like
vague concept,
like, there's an actual design.
There's a whole design to the
way it works, just like there's
a whole design into
the way the tree grows,
like there's certain causes that
actually have formed the tulku.
And like it's a very
important thing.
It's really important.
And what I'm curious
to know is is it
right to keep this
tradition going in the West
when there's no system for it to
be held, like there's no system
to bring up the tulku.
And there's no
parents that are just
going to give up their kid.
I mean, there's
no way someone who
is born in the West is just
going to hop into a Tibetan
shedra and study 14 years.
It's almost impossible.
WYATT ARNOLD: Yeah, I figured
that out actually. [LAUGHS]
Hello, could we get
two chai, please?
Trying to have a strong
grip on a so-called culture
and tradition in many
ways is not a wise thing.
Buddhism has to transcend
culture and tradition.
You know all of that.
But of course, we have
to do it carefully
because cultures and
traditions are like the means.
It's like the medium.
So we don't want to also sort
of just toss it out overnight.
It has to slowly,
organically change.
And it will change.
It has to.
Buddha said, all compounded
things are impermanent.
It will change.
And thanks to the Western
cynicism, skepticism,
this is good.
This quest and this
habit and this arrogance
or pride of wanting
to be objective
ironically helps Buddhism.
Because when Buddhism travels--
I mean, there are.
There's a small
pocket of completely
wishy-washy, mumbo-jumbo,
feeling this, vision that.
You understand?
But there's also great
many Western Buddhists
really going to Buddhism
because there is a reason
and because it's
a reason-oriented,
logic-oriented path.
And this is good.
This will be our guarantee.
I have the biggest fear
that I'll meet someone.
And then they'll
know I'm a tulku,
and then they'll turn
around and they'll be like,
he's not a tulku.
You got to be kidding me.
Because I have this huge
welling of pride in that.
And then that's cut down.
Then I feel like I'm come
nothing, which sucks.
Like, I just want
to be a normal guy.
Well, you are though.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But not really.
Are you sure?
Well, I mean if
Chagdud Tulku was right.
And even if it's not true,
there's still the title there.
I mean, it sounds
like it's better to me
to just stop recognizing,
stop giving titles and thrones
in the West because as
soon as you do that,
it just becomes political,
like this whole social ladder.
And you're here on it.
And everybody looks up to you.
But you have this horrible,
overwhelming sense
of self-doubt.
Yet you love being up there.
I mean, that's what I'm going
through a lot now is just
trying to like let go
of these expectations,
let go of my doubt, let go of
my feelings of fear and guilt,
and realize that
those are totally
associated with my perception
of how other people see me.
I got a lot of
everything from my dad,
too, because he's really
intense about this whole thing.
Like, he's got big
ideas, big ideas.
And when you're a
teenager and you're
not too cool with your dad,
you're trying to be rebel.
It just makes it all worse.
At least, it made it
so much worse for me.
I don't know.
I mean, when your father
passed away, did you feel lost?
Looking back now,
I just realize
that my dad had complete
faith that I'd figure it out.
And what all he needed to do was
like give me his lesson of what
it meant to be a
good human being,
and that I would
figure things out,
everything I need to
figure out, if I could just
work from the basis of making
my life healthy in some way
and being sane.
MAN: Lights out.
No.
I have--
GESAR MUKPO: Will you
sell me the onion?
MAN: No.
It is enough when you put--
GESAR MUKPO: It's a
very Tibetan onion.
I think you're going to
have to turn this over.
Turn it.
WYATT ARNOLD: Yeah,
and get these-- No?
[CHATTING]
[GENTLE SONG PLAYING]
It's delicious.
GESAR MUKPO: How do you say
"it's delicious" in Tibetan?
[BOTH SPEAKING TIBETAN]
[GENTLE SONG CONTINUES]
GESAR MUKPO: When I was
15, my father passed away.
And my mother decided it was
time to send me to Nepal.
She plucked me out of school
and put me in the hands of Dilgo
Khyentse Rinpoche,
the Tibetan lama had
recognized and enthroned me.
It's been almost 19 years
since I've been back to Nepal.
[GENTLE SONG CONTINUES]
I hope no one recognizes me.
[PRAYER WHEELS SQUEAK]
What do these things do?
This is also-- obviously, since
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche was
here, this is the
first place that I
actually spent any extended
period of time with him.
And he was an amazing person.
He just-- he changed my life.
When I first came here, I met
Rabjam Rinpoche, who's the head
of this monastery, pretty much.
And he knew I was just
coming over from the West.
I was 15 years old.
So he had his television
brought down to my house
and a bunch of videotapes.
And for the first three days, I
just watched movies constantly.
And I came back on the fourth
day and the VCR and television
were gone.
And that's when I
started studying Tibetan.
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
[GENTLE SONG PLAYS]
First of all, I was born in
a Buddhist family, really,
like big lamas here and there.
And then at the age
of like, really young,
I was basically shoved into.
I will not use the word "force."
But just basically.
So there was no reference.
There's no reference.
This is all changed now.
GESAR MUKPO: Shortly
after arriving in Nepal,
I met Reuben Derkson.
Born in Amsterdam in 1986,
raised in Nepal and Bhutan,
Reuben was recognized as a
tulku when he was 11 years old.
REUBEN DERKSON:
When I was young,
I had memories of
the previous life.
And so my mother was writing
those down and kind of keeping
a journal of what I was saying.
And I described the
monastery that I grew up in
or that I taught in
in my previous life,
and some of the
events that went on.
I mean, I have no memory
of this whatsoever now.
But so they had two
Tibetan monk friends,
or Bhutanese monk friends.
And they said it was a
big deal or something.
And when Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche
was being coronated here,
I was also recognized
at that time.
So I finished my
school year at Lincoln,
which is the American
school here in Kathmandu.
And then I went
to the monastery.
I can say it wasn't
completely voluntary
because I didn't really know
what I was getting into.
But I was also OK with going
into the whole Buddhist thing
because I had an image
of these Buddhist monks
as being holy and serene
and all-knowing and wise,
and that they could really
teach me the whole Buddhist
philosophy and everything.
Six days a week, five days?
Six days a week, yeah.
Sunday was off.
I can imagine three years
of that kind of intensity
for anyone is asking
a lot of someone
to be able to take, let alone a
young child who hadn't grown up
in this kind of surroundings.
Yeah, most people have no idea
what goes down in a monastery.
I mean, if you put
600 men together,
what do you expect
you're going to get?
There are some people
in the monastery who
were good leaders,
who were practicing
every day, who really were
people you could look up to.
However, the majority of
the cases, the monster
there was basically a cesspool
of jealousy, of gossip,
of hate, of violence, and very
un-Buddhist in a lot of ways,
at least, un-Buddhist
in the sense
that the preach one thing,
and then they turn around
and do exactly the opposite.
Anything you find,
you would have found
in a Christian monastery, from
homosexuality to child abuse
to beatings.
That's something that
Dzongsar Rinpoche was saying
when this person asked
him this question
about Bhutan and Sri Lanka.
Like, there's a difference
between Buddhism and Buddhists.
And you'd better
recognize that there's
a difference between them, or
else you won't be able to make
any sense out of it.
Just because someone's
studying Buddhism
does not mean that they
represent the values
of what it talks about.
Do you consider yourself
a Buddhist still?
No.
GESAR MUKPO: Now, yet
still, as you told me,
you will go back to Bhutan.
Yeah, there is a ceremony that
lasts about a week in Bhutan.
And I have been going back there
every year for the one week
to MC the ceremony.
And yeah, the reason
I do that-- see,
I don't know if I
believe in reincarnation
or in all the Buddhist values,
the traditional values.
I really don't.
But the reason I go
back there is not
because I, say, want to
go back there every year,
but more because it makes these
people so incredibly happy.
DZONGSAR KHYENTSE RINPOCHE:
In Buddhism, there
is concepts such as
reincarnation, concepts
such as tulku, all of that.
But the institutionalized tulku
system that we have in Tibetan,
I don't think
something like this
exists originally in Buddhism.
In the sutras and the
shastras, we never hear.
We never read about
Kashyapa's or Maudgalyayana's
or Shariputra has died.
And then a bunch
of guys are trying
to find their reincarnation.
We don't know this
kind of event.
I mean, there are, OK, mentions
of Ashvaghosha, [INAUDIBLE]
who reincarnates.
You understand.
But the actual institution or
the culture or the tradition
of trying to find a tulku
and then enthroning them
and all of that is a
bit of a Tibetan thing.
Started much later, I feel.
And now, I personally
think that to hold
that culture, institutionalized
tulku, that culture is dying.
It's not going to work anymore.
And if it doesn't work, I think
that's almost for the better
because this tulku is going
to-- if the Tibetans are
not careful, this tulku system
is going to ruin Buddhism.
And at the end of the
day, Buddhism is more
important than tulku system.
Who cares about tulku
and what happens to them?
So I just dial?
WYATT ARNOLD: Yeah.
Zero, zero, one?
WYATT ARNOLD: Only one.
[PHONE DIALING]
AUTOMATED VOICE: We're sorry.
Your call cannot be
completed as dialed.
Please check the
number and dial again.
Or call your
operator to help you.
[MUSIC PLAYING, DON BROWNRIGG,
"REMEMBER HOME"]
[PHONE RINGS]
Shh, I'm talking.
You need to be quiet, actually.
[BEEP]
Hello?
GIRL: Can you say something?
Hello.
Hello, hello.
[BEEP]
[SONG CONTINUES]
GESAR MUKPO: I'm proud
of being a tulku.
And despite my questions, it's
something very special and dear
in my life.
And I wouldn't change anything
about this precious experience.
I value the connection
to my teachers,
the Tibetan community,
and my monastery.
[TIBETAN HORNS PLAYING]
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
Hello, Rinpoche.
Ah, so sorry.
I didn't recognize you. [LAUGHS]
Welcome back.
I'm glad you made it.
I wasn't sure if
you would be here.
When I first came to
Shechen Monastery in Nepal,
the young abbot,
Rabjung Rinpoche,
helped me make the
difficult transition.
His kind heart and jovial
nature made me feel
at ease a world away from home.
At 16, after spending a
year in the monastery,
I was feeling homesick and
decided I didn't want to be
there for the rest of my life.
I called my mother.
And she arranged for me
to come back immediately.
I've often wondered if I
made the right decision.
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
GESAR MUKPO: Including everyone
here, how many monks are there?
MAN 2: Almost 300.
GESAR MUKPO: Wow.
MAN 2: But some are like out in
retreat or they're [INAUDIBLE].
GESAR MUKPO: So most
people here in the shedra?
MAN 2: Shedra and
[INAUDIBLE] school.
[SIGHS]
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS PLAY]
Whether I am a tulku or
not is insignificant.
I have a tremendous
connection to this monastery
and its people, a tremendous
connection with my father
and his heritage.
They will always be a part of
who I am, no matter what I do.
[HORNS AND CYMBALS PLAY]
I'll never know for sure
what my father had in mind.
There will always be
a certain ambiguity.
Still, I can't help
but feel that he knew I
would figure it out for myself.
Having spent time
with these tulkus,
I found we have much in common.
There's no certain
path for any of us,
other than the path
of self-discovery.
It can be a lonely path.
But in the end, it is the
only way that anything
meaningful is born.
So I can't think of
a better way to honor
this situation than to
simply go home and share
my story with my daughter.
Perhaps someday, she'll
keep this incredible wisdom
that is our birthright alive.
Any of these teachers
at the end of their life
are completely happy with the
experience of what they've had
and what they've been doing.
I've never heard of
a Buddhist renouncing
their faith at death.
I think my ride is here.
[AIRPLANE TAKING OFF]
[MUSIC PLAYING, DAN BROWNRIGG,
"IN IT"]